I want to create a Windows application that can monitor the entire screen in real-time and feed that information into AI so that it can monitor what I'm doing. it must see in realtime, and give me intelligent suggestions using voice on what to do next, or wait for me to say hey Jarvis, which is the cue to start listening and monitoring my screen. i want to give the AI control of my mouse and keyboard as well, and literally do what i ask it to do with voice. so basically like jarvis in ironman, but has the ability to be a secretary and can do multiple things on my pc with my permission. so: 1. is this possible? 2. what software will be best for speed and low system process usage and memory usage. 3. It needs to be free apart from the API used for interactions, but should be able to use free usage tiers as well for simple tasks, and if the task is complex, then switch to paid tiers.
ChatGPT said:
Thought for 56s
Short answer first:

Yes, it is absolutely possible.
For speed and low resource usage on Windows: a native-first stack (C#/.NET 8 with a small C++ helper for capture and input) will beat Python/Electron in latency and memory.
You can assemble this almost entirely from free components and only pay an LLM API when needed. Use local/offline pieces for hotword, STT, and TTS, then “escalate” to a paid LLM only for complex reasoning.

Below is a practical architecture and a parts list that you can build today.
A pragmatic “Jarvis” on Windows
High level flow

Idle watch mode: A tiny hotword model listens for “hey Jarvis”. No recording, no cloud calls.
Assist mode (after wake word):

  1. Grab the screen in real time (downscaled).
  2. Transcribe your voice locally.
  3. Send the latest screen frame + your transcript to an LLM “brain”.
  4. The LLM replies with either a spoken suggestion or an action plan with tool calls.
  5. Your app performs actions using safe, gated control of mouse, keyboard and UI Automation.
  6. Always show a permissions banner with an emergency stop.
Recommended stack for low CPU/RAM
All of these are free to use. Only the LLM “brain” needs a paid tier if you choose a cloud model for complex tasks.
Host app

C# .NET 8, WinUI 3 or WPF. Minimal memory, fast startup, great Windows API access.
Optional: a small C++/Win32 helper DLL for the fastest capture and input injection.

Screen capture

Windows.Graphics.Capture API (Win10 1903+). It uses the Desktop Duplication path under the hood and is efficient. Aim for 2 to 5 fps at a reduced resolution like 960x540 PNG or JPEG to cut bandwidth without losing context.

Mouse and keyboard control

Win32 SendInput for synthetic input.
Prefer deterministic control via UI Automation (UIA) when possible. It is far more reliable than pixel clicking and safer.

Hotword detection (“hey Jarvis”)

openWakeWord (open source) or Picovoice Porcupine (very light, free personal tier). These run locally and sip CPU.

Speech to text (STT) - offline

Vosk with the small English model, or faster-whisper/whisper.cpp with tiny/base models. Both run locally. Start “base” for better accuracy and downshift to “tiny” if you need even less CPU.

Text to speech (TTS) - free

Windows built-in SAPI 5 voices via System.Speech.Synthesis.
For higher quality but still free: Piper (fast local neural TTS) invoked as a subprocess.

The AI brain

Tiered routing:

  * Local, free: small vision-capable or tool-using models are limited, so for “simple” tasks you can let the LLM reason just over OCR and your transcript without sending images.
  * Cloud, paid when needed: send the downscaled frame + transcript to a realtime LLM endpoint that supports streaming and tool-use. Keep “simple” requests on a free mini model; escalate to a stronger paid model only for complex actions. Your router decides based on prompt length, confidence, or a “complexity score”.
Vision on the cheap

Many “suggestion” tasks do not need raw image vision. You can:

  * Run local OCR on the frame (Windows OCR or Tesseract) and send only extracted text + a few detected UI element boxes to the LLM.
  * Fall back to sending the compressed image only when text is insufficient.
Safety and control essentials

Big on-screen banner when Assist mode is active with a hold-to-allow or 1-click allow for each action batch.
Global kill switch hotkey and a whitelist of allowed apps and domains.
Session logs of what the AI attempted and what you approved.
Never keep an open mic. Hotword model runs, but recording starts only after the wake word.
Optional: screen redaction zones so your passwords and private info are never captured.

Concrete answers to your 3 questions

Is this possible?
Yes. Every piece exists today:


Realtime Windows screen capture is straightforward.
Offline wake word and STT are mature.
Low-latency TTS is built into Windows or available via Piper.
Mouse/keyboard control and UI Automation are standard Windows APIs.
Realtime LLMs can take your transcript and screen context to propose steps and even output tool calls for the host app to execute with your permission.


Best software choices for speed and low usage


Language/UI: C# .NET 8 with WinUI 3 or WPF.
Capture: Windows.Graphics.Capture.
Input: SendInput + UI Automation.
Hotword: openWakeWord or Porcupine.
STT: Vosk or faster-whisper with a tiny/base model.
TTS: Windows SAPI 5 or Piper.
Orchestration: A lightweight in-process plugin system for “skills” plus a WebSocket client for the LLM.

Avoid Electron for the core agent. Python is great for prototypes, but for always-on low idle CPU, a native-first C#/C++ approach will feel snappier and use far less RAM.
3) Free apart from the API, with auto switch to paid tiers

Hotword, STT, TTS, OCR, capture, input control: all free and local.
Create a router:

  * If the user says “open notepad and paste my clipboard” use a free local rule-based skill with no LLM.
  * If the user says “rewrite this email professionally and schedule it for 8am” use a free small model first.
  * If the user says “analyse this spreadsheet and propose a 3-month cashflow plan with risks and mitigations”, escalate to a stronger paid model.

You control costs with simple rules like token budget per task, fallback ladders, and an “always ask before paid” toggle.

Minimal technical blueprint
Processes

Agent.exe (C# host)

  * HotwordService (wake word only, always-on, <1 percent CPU)
  * AudioService (captures mic after wake, streams to STT)
  * CaptureService (2-5 fps, 960x540)
  * OcrService (Tesseract or Windows OCR)
  * LlmClient (WebSocket to model routes)
  * Skills (plugins)
    * Window switch, launch app, type text, click by UIA, clipboard ops, file ops, browser control, etc.
  * GuardRail (allowlist, prompts, logs, kill switch)
Data loop

Hotword fires.
Start mic capture.
Grab current screen frame, run OCR to text+boxes.
Send transcript + OCR (and image if needed) to LLM with tool schema.
Receive suggested actions.
Show a compact UI card with steps and an Approve button.
Execute via UI Automation or SendInput.
Speak the result via TTS. Return to watch mode.

Tiny code seeds (C#)
Screen capture seed (Windows.Graphics.Capture)
text// Add WinRT references: Windows.Graphics.Capture, Windows.Graphics.DirectX.Direct3D11
// Requires Win10 1903+ and .NET 8
var picker = new GraphicsCapturePicker();
var item = await picker.PickSingleItemAsync();
if (item is null) return;

using var d3d = new SharpDX.Direct3D11.Device(SharpDX.Direct3D.DriverType.Hardware);
var framePool = Direct3D11CaptureFramePool.Create(
    d3d.AsDirect3D11Device(),
    Windows.Graphics.DirectX.DirectXPixelFormat.B8G8R8A8UIntNormalized,
    2,
    item.Size);
using var session = framePool.CreateCaptureSession(item);
session.StartCapture();

framePool.FrameArrived += (pool, args) =>
{
    using var frame = pool.TryGetNextFrame();
    // TODO: downscale and JPEG encode here, then send to AI if needed
};
Mouse and keyboard control seed
text[DllImport("user32.dll", SetLastError=true)]
static extern uint SendInput(uint nInputs, INPUT[] pInputs, int cbSize);

// Example: type text
void TypeText(string s) {
    var inputs = new List<INPUT>();
    foreach (char c in s) {
        short vk = VkKeyScan(c);
        inputs.Add(new INPUT { type = 1, U = new InputUnion { ki = new KEYBDINPUT { wVk = (ushort)(vk & 0xff) } } });
        inputs.Add(new INPUT { type = 1, U = new InputUnion { ki = new KEYBDINPUT { wVk = (ushort)(vk & 0xff), dwFlags = 2 } } });
    }
    SendInput((uint)inputs.Count, inputs.ToArray(), Marshal.SizeOf<INPUT>());
}
Speak a suggestion with SAPI
textusing System.Speech.Synthesis;
var tts = new SpeechSynthesizer();
tts.Rate = 0; // 0 default, tweak for speed
tts.SpeakAsync("I suggest opening Settings and enabling Bluetooth.");
Cost control and modes

Local-only mode: hotword, STT, TTS, OCR, rules, simple skills. Zero API cost.
Free-tier cloud: route short queries to a mini model with a hard monthly token cap.
Paid escalation: you approve before use. The UI shows a token estimate and expected cost.

What I would build first

A barebones .NET 8 app with:

   * Hotword wake using openWakeWord or Porcupine.
   * After wake, local STT with Vosk and TTS via SAPI.
   * Screen capture at 2 fps and OCR to text-only.
   * A single deterministic skill: “Open Notepad and type what I say.”

Add the permission banner and global kill switch.
Add the LLM router and a couple of tool-using skills like “summarise what is on screen”, “find and click the Save button”, “compose a polite email from bullet points”.

This gets you a fast, private, mostly-free Jarvis that only spends money when it truly needs heavyweight reasoning.
If you want, I can sketch the folder structure, NuGet packages, and the first pass at the LLM tool schema next.
 
ChatGPT can make mistakes. Check important info. See Cookie Preferences.Thought for 35sYes, I largely agree—this architecture is sound and solid overall. It's pragmatic, prioritizes low resource usage (e.g., via native Windows APIs and lightweight local models), keeps most components free and offline, and incorporates essential safety measures like permissions and kill switches. The tiered escalation for AI (local rules → free models → paid APIs) is a smart way to control costs while handling complexity. It's feasible to build today with the outlined tools, and the flow (hotword → capture → transcription → reasoning → action) mimics real-world assistants like Siri or Alexa but with more control.
That said, based on current trends as of October 2025, there are a few refinements and alternatives that could make it even better—mostly evolutionary updates to libraries, hardware considerations, and emerging local multimodal options to reduce cloud dependency further. I'll break this down step-by-step: what works well, minor tweaks, and potential upgrades. I focused on verifying for speed, low CPU/RAM (under 100-200MB idle ideally), and free tiers, drawing from recent benchmarks and discussions.
1. Core Strengths of the Proposal

Feasibility (Your Q1): Absolutely possible. Windows APIs like Graphics.Capture and SendInput are stable and performant for real-time monitoring/control. Offline hotword/STT/TTS stacks are mature, and multimodal LLMs (vision + text) can now handle screen analysis locally on decent hardware, escalating to cloud only when needed.
Low Resource Focus (Your Q2): C#/.NET 8 (or now .NET 9 previews) is an excellent choice—it's native, compiles to efficient code, and integrates seamlessly with Win32/UI Automation for sub-50ms latency on inputs. Avoid Python for the core (as suggested) since it can spike RAM by 2-3x in always-on scenarios. Benchmarks show this stack idling at <1% CPU on mid-range PCs.
Free Except APIs (Your Q3): Spot on. All local pieces (capture, input, hotword, STT, TTS, OCR) are open-source/free. For APIs, free tiers like Hugging Face's Inference API (for mini models) or Grok's free quotas handle basics; paid escalation (e.g., to OpenAI GPT-4o or Grok 4) for complex tasks keeps costs under $0.01-0.05 per query.
Safety and Privacy: The banner, kill switch, redaction zones, and no-open-mic policy are best practices. Recent guidelines emphasize logging all actions for audits and using tools like Azure AI Content Safety (free tier) to filter harmful suggestions.

2. Minor Tweaks and Confirmations
These are small adjustments based on 2025 updates—no major overhauls needed.

Screen Capture: Windows.Graphics.Capture remains the gold standard for low-resource apps (2-5 FPS at 960x540 uses ~20-50MB RAM). Recent benchmarks confirm it's faster than alternatives like DirectX hooks. Tweak: Add hardware acceleration via Direct3D11 (as in your code seed) and compress to WebP (faster than JPEG for screens). If you need OCR integration, pair with Windows.Media.Ocr (built-in, zero extra install) over Tesseract for 20-30% less CPU.
Input Control: SendInput + UI Automation is reliable and safe. Update: Use the newer Accessibility APIs in Windows 11/12 for better element detection, reducing "pixel-clicking" errors. For voice-approved actions, add a verbal confirmation loop (e.g., "Confirming: Opening Notepad?").
Hotword Detection: openWakeWord and Picovoice Porcupine are still top-tier—both <1% CPU idle, offline, and customizable. Porcupine edges out for accuracy (95%+ on noisy environments per 2025 tests). Tweak: Train a custom model for "Hey Jarvis" using Porcupine's free tools to cut false positives.
STT (Offline): Vosk and faster-whisper (with tiny/base models) are excellent for low resources—whisper-tiny runs on CPU at ~100ms latency, using 50-150MB RAM. 2025 updates: faster-whisper (via Hugging Face) has optimizations for Windows ARM (if on Copilot+ PCs), beating Vosk on accents. Start with whisper-base for balance; drop to tiny for ultra-low spec.
TTS: Windows SAPI is fine for basics (free, built-in), but Piper is superior for naturalness—it's neural, local, and sips CPU (under 100ms per sentence). 2025 pick: XTTS-v2 (open-source) for even better prosody and multi-speaker support; it runs offline via Coqui TTS forks.
Vision/OCR: Starting with OCR (text + boxes) before sending images is efficient. Update: Use ML.NET's ONNX runtime for local OCR—it's faster than Tesseract on Windows (integrated with .NET).
AI Brain/Routing: The tiered system is solid. For local/free: Use rule-based skills for 80% of tasks (e.g., regex matching for "open app"). Escalate to cloud for reasoning. Cost control: Add token estimators in your C# app (e.g., via TikToken library).

3. Better Suggestions and Upgrades
Here are targeted improvements to make it more robust, faster, or future-proof. These build on the proposal without complicating it.

Incorporate Local Multimodal LLMs for Vision: Big advance in 2025—models like Pixtral (Mistral-based) or Phi-4 Multimodal (Microsoft) can run locally on GPUs (e.g., 8GB VRAM) for screen analysis without cloud. They handle "describe screen" or "suggest next step" offline, reducing latency to <1s and API costs to zero for simple tasks. Integrate via Ollama or LM Studio (free, Windows-compatible). Fallback: If no GPU, stick to OCR + text-only models like Llama 3.2 (via Hugging Face). This enhances "intelligent suggestions" without always sending images.
Hardware Optimizations: For ultra-low usage, target Windows on ARM (e.g., Snapdragon X Elite laptops)—benchmarks show 30-50% less power draw for STT/TTS. If your PC has an NPU (Neural Processing Unit, common in 2025 devices), offload hotword/STT to it via ONNX for near-zero CPU impact.
Expanded Skills and Integration: Add browser control via Playwright.NET (free, low-overhead) for web tasks. For secretary features (e.g., scheduling), integrate with Windows Calendar API. Voice cue: After "Hey Jarvis," use a 5-10s listening window to avoid constant monitoring.
Performance Monitoring: Add self-monitoring—use Windows Performance Counters in C# to track CPU/RAM and auto-downshift (e.g., reduce FPS if >5% usage). Tools like Prometheus (free) for logging.
Alternative Stacks if C# Feels Heavy:


Overall: The architecture is sound and solid ✅
The proposal is technically feasible and well-thought-out. However, there are some important updates for October 2025:
Key Updates & Corrections:
.NET 9 is now available (released November 2024) with significant performance improvements - over 1,000 performance-related changes, 15% faster request processing, and improved memory management Performance Improvements in .NET 9 - .NET Blog +2. The document mentions .NET 8/.NET 9 previews, but you should now use .NET 9 as your base.
faster-whisper remains excellent - up to 4x faster than OpenAI's Whisper with lower memory usage GitHub. Windows standalone executables are available GitHub, making it easy to use without Python overhead.
Ollama now has full multimodal support with a custom engine for vision models including Llama 4, Gemma 3, and Qwen 2.5 VL Ollama's new engine for multimodal models · Ollama Blog +2. This means you can run local vision-capable AI models for screen analysis without cloud costs.
Picovoice Porcupine is still excellent but requires a free AccessKey (sign up required) PicovoicePicovoice. The free tier allows custom wake word training.



























AspectOriginal (C#/.NET)Alternative (Rust + Tauri)Why Consider?Resource UsageLow (50-200MB RAM idle)Ultra-low (20-100MB)Rust is even more efficient for always-on; Tauri for UI. Good if you want cross-platform later.SpeedFast (native)Faster compilation, sub-20ms latencyBenchmarks show 10-20% edge on inputs.EaseHigh (great docs)Medium (steeper learning)Stick to C# unless you're comfortable with Rust. Free/open-source.

API Options for Paid Tier: For complex tasks, Grok 4 (via xAI API) is strong for reasoning + tools; free quotas on grok.com for basics. Alternatives: OpenAI's GPT-4o-mini (cheap at $0.15/1M tokens) or Anthropic's Claude. Router logic: Classify by keyword (e.g., "analyze spreadsheet" → paid).
Testing and Iteration: Start with the minimal blueprint as suggested. Prototype in phases: Hotword + STT/TTS first, then capture, then actions. Use forums like Reddit's r/dotnet or r/MachineLearning for feedback—recent threads praise similar builds for privacy.

4. Potential Drawbacks and Mitigations

Latency on Low-End PCs: If no GPU, local models might lag (2-5s for STT). Mitigate: Optimize with quantization (e.g., 4-bit models via GGUF).
Accuracy Tradeoffs: Offline STT/TTS isn't perfect on accents/noise. Test with datasets; fallback to cloud if confidence <80%.
Legal/Privacy: Screen monitoring could raise issues in shared environments. Add opt-in consent and data deletion.